Graham, L., Berman, J., & Bellert, A. (2015). Sustainable Learning.
Melbourne, Vic: Cambridge University Press.

Chapter 6

Intended learning outcomes
Engagement with the text in this chapter will' enable
readers to do tbe following:
• utilise the ATRiUM capabilities to focus on the
strengths and needs of individual students when
planning and implementing responsive teaching for
effective learning
• explain the limitations of using labels to categorise
the learning needs of students with disabilities or
learning difficulties and understand that responsive
teachers focus on learning, not labels, in order to best
provide learning for all
• describe key aspects of some major disability catego·
ries and identify capabilities on which to focus when
planning learning support for students with disabilities or learning difficulties
• reflect on how collaboration with families and
systematic frameworks for intervention inform and
support responsive teaching
• distinguish how key strategies and instructional
approaches support teaching for learning for all

I

I

:--·-·--------------------------- __j

Sustainable Learning

Big ideas
• In learning for all, responsive teachers strive to provide teaching and learning that
meet the needs of all learners. This requires insight into the needs of all students
in the class and knowledge about evidence-based strategies and approaches to
teaching.
• All learners have similar fundamental learning needs, yet every learner is different.
These differences matter, especially in terms of planned, responsive teaching and
effective learning.
• By viewing students with disabilities or learning difficulties through the
lens of ATRiUM capabilities, teachers can gain valuable insights that proATRiUM Active
learning; Thinking;
vide important information for teaching and learning.
Relating to others;
• Although knowing about disability categories may provide teachers with
Using language,
useful information about student learning, an overt focus on disabilities
symbols and ICT; and
or learning difficulties can lead teachers to view students in terms of what
Managing self.
they can't do rather than what they can do.
• Collaboration with the families of students with disabilities or learning difficulties
facilitates information-sharing that is beneficial to all.
• Early intervention is predicated upon the assumption that providing timely, appropriate support for learning can reduce the impact of disability, with long-term
benefits for individuals, their families and their communities.
• Research has validated some key instructional approaches that lead to improved
learning outcomes for students with disabilities or learning difficulties. Combining
direct instruction and strategy instruction is a fundamentally effective approach for
supporting learning for all.

Introduction
When the wide range of developmental domains are considered - such as language,
visual processing, sensory integration, physical growth, coordination, memory, selfregulation of emotion and attention, motivation and social skills - then every individual has a unique profile of capabilities and differences, mediated by factors such as
personality and experience. This diversity is based on differences, and in the context
ofresponsive teaching and effective student learning, students' differences matter.
Sustainable learning focuses on the capabilities and learning needs of all students
and the professional capabilities and professional learning needs of all teachers. In
order to sustain learning, both teachers and students need to develop knowledge,
skills, strategies and attitudes that will equip them to negotiate the contemporary
world's increasingly complex and uncertain circumstances. Inclusive practices lie at
the heart of learning for all; therefore, the knowledge and practices most relevant
to inclusion are the focus of this chapter. Teaching for sustainable learning requires
teachers to make instructional plans and decisions based on the needs of the learners
about what to teach and how to teach it effectively. Specifically, this chapter relates to

~:

Seeks to further a cause beyond the self

Figure 6.1: Maslow's expanded hierarchy of needs
Source: Adapted from Maslow 1954, 1987. Printed and electronically reproduced by permission of
Pearson Education, Inc.

the identification of students' learning needs and consequent intentional planning by
the teacher to provide learning opportunities for all.

What do all students need?

Il
i

What do all students need in order to learn? Although teachers must identify the particular learning needs of individual students, it is useful to reflect that in many ways
all students have similar needs, both in general and in regard to learning.
A well-known framework for considering human needs in general is Maslow's
(1954, 1987) hierarchy of needs, which examines human behaviour from a holistic
perspective. It proposes that people's behaviour and motivation can be understood as
the processes of striving to meet universal human needs. Accordingly, human needs
are arranged in a hierarchy of physical, emotional, social and intellectual needs.
Maslow's theory includes the premise, disputed by some, that survival needs must
be satisfied before it is possible to progress to higher-level, or growth, needs. An
extended hierarchy is represented in figure 6.1 (Koltko-Rivera 2006).

Think and do 6 .1 : Hierarchy of needs
Using the stages of need depicted in figure 6.1, describe Maslow's (1954, 1987)
hierarchy of needs in the context of student learning in contemporary classrooms.
Make sure you think inclusively; for example, consider multicultural perspectives
and disability perspectives.

1

What are the basic student needs to which teachers can contribute?

2

How earl teac11ers ensure their stl1dents 1 psychological and cognitive needs are
met in the classroom?

3

What does self-fulfilment mean in an everyday classroom setting?

Sustainable Learning
Maslow's hierarchy theory has obvious applications in classroom teachers' work.
Students who are hungry or frightened, for example, need to have their physiological
needs met in order to fully participate in classroom activities and learning. Similarly,
students need to feel comfortable within the classroom and know that their contributions and efforts are valued if they are to progress academically to the best of their
potential.
Once certain environmental and affective conditions within the classroom and
school environment are in place, what do all students need in order to learn? An
obvious response is 'Good teaching!' Hattie's (2003, 2009) work provides key information about 'good' teaching by identifying influences most likely to have a positive impact on the nature and quality of effective student learning. In reporting over
800 meta-analyses relating to student achievement, Hattie (2003, 2) differentiated
the major sources of variance in student performance and discovered that teachermediated factors account for about 30 per cent of these, noting that 'it is what teachers know, do, and care about which is very powerful in this learning equation'.
According to Hattie's analysis, the areas under teachers' control that are most likely
to influence students' achievement include feedback and remediation with feedback,
instruction and direct instruction, class environment, the challenge of goals, peer
tutoring and mastery learning. (The question of what constitutes 'good' teaching is
also discussed in chapters 3 and 7.)

Think and do 6. 2: Teaching influences
All students need 'good' teaching in order to learn to the best of their potential.
Research the teacher-mediated influences that Hattie (2003) identified as most
beneficial for improving student-learning outcomes.
2

Think about teaching ancl learning experiences that 'worked' for you at
school or university or ir1 other learr1ing environmer1ts. Putting aside the
personality of the teacher, identify the Leaching approaches and strategies
that were most helpflll to you as a learner. Can you relate tl1ese strategies
and approaches to the teacher-mediated influences shown to have a large
impact?

Teachers can derive a lot of useful information about their students - what they
need to learn and how best to teach it - by first gathering information about their
capabilities and learning needs. Using information-gathering and evaluation of student needs based on the ATRiUM capabilities can provide a lens through which to
look for deeper understandings about the capabilities and learning needs of all students, as well as for identifying areas for pedagogical and instructional supports that
individual students may require. Figure 6.2 shows some key areas to consider when
identifying students' capabilities and learning needs.

... ' . '~-~

Access
Participation
Engagement
Communication

• physical access and mobility
• access to curriculum and assessment
• adjustments required to enable all students to take part and make
contributions on an equal basis
• a relevant, respectful curriculum for all students
• abillty in speaking, listening, literacy, numeracy, ICT

Knowledge and
understanding
Memory
processes
Applying
knowledge

• background knowledge and understand of self and society
• cognitive development
• retention, recall and application of knowledge previously encountered
• efficiency of working-memory processes
• problem-solving
• creativity and ability to transfer knowledge

Social skills
Communication

• peer group 'norms'
• verbal and non-verbal communication
• cooperation and collaboration
• respect for others
• empathy and emotional insight

Academic skills
tCT proficiency
Communication

Self-regulation
Attention
Motivation
Behaviour

• reading, writing, speaking, listening, viewing, representing
• mathematics, including number and algebra
• organising and expressing ideas and responses
• attitude to using ICT
• opportunity to use ICT
• evaluation and filtering of information from e-sources

• focusing appropriately and ignoring distractions
• perseverance and persistence
• managing impulses
• intrinsic motivation and motivation to please others
• self-efficacy
• self-regulation

Figure 6.2: Using ATRiUM to identify students' capabilities and learning needs

Sustainable Learning

Supporting learning for all
There is much that a classroom teacher can do to support learning for all, but in the
context of sustainable learning, such support is maximised when it takes place within
a broader framework that effectively draws upon family, community and systemic
structures.

Home-school partnerships
Students do not leave their home and community when they come to school but begin
to belong to another community and face the challenge of reconciling similarities and
differences between these communities. Teachers can expand and enrich students'
day-to-day interactions by fostering family-school partnering practices that empower
families to support students at home and in school (Lines, Miller and Arthur-Stanley
2011). Nurturing respectful relationships with families and developing a genuine
sense of shared responsibility are seen as fundamental to providing better learning
outcomes for all students.
Schools can provide details about available community services and facilities
and information that have the potential to help families with issues they face in relation to parenting, understanding child and adolescent development and supporting
learning in the home. Parents or carers are the 'experts' on their children and can
provide invaluable information for teachers about their children, their history and
their personal characteristics, all of which help teachers better understand the children as learners. Families can also help teachers to understand children's family
backgrounds, cultures and goals.
Schools and teachers need to communicate with families about a wide range
of matters, but especially about school programs and student progress. In order
for communication to remain open, it is important that parents and carers are
informed about a student's successes as well as their challenges and that teachers
and school leaders are available and approachable so parents and carers can initiate
communication.

Learning does not stop with the last lesson of the school day, and many parents
and carers are keen to support their children by discussing, practising and applying their academic skills at home. Parents and carers can be encouraged to support
their children in applying 'school learning' in reading, writing or mathematics to
everyday literacy and numeracy tasks, such as writing a shopping list and calculating costs. It is also important for parents and carers to continue to value informal
learning that occurs through play, social events, household tasks and other aspects
of daily life.
Both school and home can benefit when schools provide opportunities for family
and community members to volunteer. This enables members of the broader school
community to make a contribution at a level they are comfortable with and gives the
school access to resources that would otherwise not be available.

142

Intervention planning

I

Many, but not all, students with disabilities or learning difficulties display learning
patterns that are different or delayed when compared to those of their peers. A common response is to provide some kind of intervention to support students' learning
of the desired knowledge or skills. Early intervention - that is, intervention offered
when the learning delays first become apparent - is thought to be the most effective
approach, because it can prevent more long-term and serious impacts of disability
or learning difficulty, potentially improving learning outcomes and reducing the need
for costly ongoing support. For example, when formative assessment early in the
school year indicates that a student is experiencing difficulty in writing sentences, a
brief and well-targeted intervention program implemented at the time has greater
potential to help the student 'catch up' with their peers than waiting until the delay
is 'proven' by formal testing or end-of-year reporting (the wait-to-fail approach). The
long-term benefits of such interventions are obvious: the costs of timely short-term
intervention are far outweighed by the costs of not intervening and waiting until the
student has 'failed'. Early identification of delays in learning followed by focused
short-term or long-term instructional interventions can significantly decrease the
impact of learning problems during school and for the whole of an individual's life.
The duration and frequency of early intervention are variable, depending on the
level of need and the complexity of the condition. Importantly, in order to maximise
the effective use of available resources to achieve educational outcomes, it is essential
that intervention approaches are based on evidence of best practice rather than on a
whim of what might work. Such an approach is also relevant to systemic considerations - that is, school and system planning - about how to provide timely, effective
and efficient academic, social or behavioural support to students.
An influential model that can be used to guide such intervention planning and
resource allocation considerations is response to intervention (often abbreviated
to Rt! and also referred to as responsiveness to intervention and response to
instruction). Response to intervention is an approach that advocates systematic attention to both early identification of emerging learning delays
Response to
intervention is a
through screening and classroom assessment, and early intervention
multi-level approach
using planned and evidence-based approaches (Gersten et al. 2009). It
for aiding students
combines screening and high-quality instruction for every student with
that is adjusted c1nd
regular monitoring and assessment to identify learning difficulties as soon
modified as needed.
as they emerge and timely, effective intervention to prevent students from
falling behind (see Fuchs and Fuchs 2006).
Consistent with the least intensive to most intensive design of the multi-tiered
response to intervention model. at tier 1 students are provided with effective,
evidence-based instruction in their classroom with information from universal,
curriculum-based assessment and monitoring used to inform instructional decisionmaking. Students who do not demonstrate anticipated progress in response to this

Figure 6.3: The three tiers of response to intervention
Source: Adapted from Vaughn 2003. Reproduced with permission of the RTI Center.

core, universal instruction are identified through assessment and monitoring. They
then participate in small-group supplementary tier 2 interventions and, when necessary, more intensive tier 3 interventions (Vaughn 2003; see figure 6.3).
Research on multi-tier implementations in the United States has indicated evidence of growth in student performance, increased task completion and reduction in
special educational referrals (Glover and Di Perna 2007). Response to intervention
has been influential in the United States in recent decades, particularly as it applies
to identifying low-achieving students soon after learning delays or problems emerge
and providing them with timely, appropriate intervention (Fuchs and Fuchs 2006).
In Australia, where formal diagnosis of students experiencing learning difficulties is
not routinely required to access school learning support services, the construct of
response to intervention is more relevant as a framework for systematic planning for
curriculum-based assessment and monitoring and appropriate intervention (Graham
and Bailey 2007). Although response to intervention is yet to be widely implemented
in Australia, it is relevant to this discussion of intervention because of its emphasis
on quality-first teaching, and due to its potential to inform a responsive, systematic,
data-driven approach to the planning and provision of appropriate support for those
students experiencing persistent learning difficulties.

Disabilities and learning difficulties
So far in this text, we have not explicitly described categories of disabilities or learning difficulties, as we wanted to delay this discussion until it could be framed within
broader considerations about sustainable learning and responsive teaching. Using
disability or learning difficulty labels to describe and understand students and their

.o

earning needs is of limited value for teachers working towards providing learning
for all. The notion of sustainable learning implies a commitment to perceiving each
·student as an individual who is developing - seeing students holistically, as learners with unique characteristics, rather than recognising them according to labels
or categories of limitation. In this way, the learners themselves - their capabilities,
talents, experiences, background knowledge and motivations - are acknowledged
;and respected. Knowing about students' interests, motivations, ability to use and
'.understand language and levels of proficiency in academic and social skills provides
·teachers with far more information to work with in developing responsive teaching than knowledge about the causes and characteristics of a particular disability
•. or learning difficulty - although this information does have relevance, as discussed
:below.

. Think and do 6.3: Capabilities and differences
. Think about a person you know whose development and/or learning was delayed
. or notably different in .some way compared to that of their peers. You may have
encountered the persor1 during your schooling, in the community, i11 your family or

while teru:,hing. Without using any disability or learning difficulty labels or referring
to what the person 'couldn)t do') briefly describe tl1e perso11, their capabilities and

differences and what their strengths and needs as a learner might be. Repeat this
three-step process to describe yourself.
Students' capabilities and differences and the distinctions between difference
and disability or learning difficulty are complex matters. They are also very relevant
matters for teachers to consider and frequently reconsider, because students with disabilities, learning difficulties or other additional learning needs, all of whom require
adjustments, differentiation or a different approach to enable learning, are present
in almost all classrooms. In many ways, as we have seen, these students have the
same fundamental learning needs as their peers, but in some unique ways their
needs are different from those of their peers. Many students, with disabilities or
without, will require additional assistance and support for learning from their teachers during their school lives. The responsibility to provide learning for all means
that teachers acknowledge differences in their students' capabilities and plan for,
resource and deliver learning experiences that intentionally and respectfully develop
the capabilities of the learners.
In particular contexts, including the educational planning necessary for learning for all, differences do have to be acknowledged, and student needs in academic,
social and lifelong learning skills, when divergent from those of their peers, need to
be identified.
In preparing to teach students with disabilities or learning difficulties, teachers
need to make sure they don't rely on formulaic responses - for example, that students

I .. - .
I

Sustainable Learning
who have spina bifida require a certain set of supports and teaching, while learners
who have ASD require a different set. This is true only to a certain extent and can
be quite misleading. It also suggests that the process of understanding what each
student brings to their learning is simple, when in fact it is very complex. Responsive
teachers question assumptions around a label and find out what it means for this
learner, in this school context, at this time.

Online research
There is an overwhelming body of accessible knowledge about disabilities and learning
difficulties - too much to know and too much to cover in detail in this book. Instead, a useful
approach is to access and filter the information available online. For example, the NSW Department of Education and Communities' online resource Physical as Anything is an informative
and reliable starting point for research. It contains information about a wide range of medical,
developmental and psychological conditions, with pages on specific conditions and related
information under the tabs 'Schools and teachers', 'Implications for schools' and 'Classroom
support' (Department of Education and Communities, n.d.). Similarly, New Zealand's Ministry
of Health 12014) website contains information about some common disabilities and learning
difficulties.

However, when researching online, significant caution is needed, as there are many websites
promoting commercial programs and educational approaches promulgated for specific disabilities and learning difficulties that do not have a sound evidence base. Bourke and Loveridge
(2013) suggest useful criteria for evidence-based research and stipulate finding a balanced
view by looking at research, practice and personal perspectives on the topic. The following
access tips and filtering parameters are also helpful.

Access tips
•

Define your search by identifying keywords, for example, 'students' 'spina bifida' and
'learning' (and, perhaps, 11.ustralia' or 'New Zealand').

•

Use double quotation marks to search for an exact phrase.

• The Boolean search terms 11.ND', 'OR' and 'NOT' help refine a search.

Filtering parameters
Authority: Who is the author? Do you know the author? Does the page express fact or

opinion? Are other viewpoints acknowledged?
Objectivity: Does the information seem to be biased? Are all perspectives represented in

a balanced way? Is the information actually intended to be humorous or a parody instead
of serious?
Timeliness: How current and timely is the information? Does the page provide specific
dates? Does it matter how current the information is for this topic?

Efficiency: Is the information worth the effort necessary to access it? Is it well organisedfor example, is there a table of contents, menu, index and other navigational tools? Is the
information presented in simple and effective way?
Authenticity: Is the information authentic? Is it from a credible organisation? Has its accu-

racy been confirmed by others? Does it come from a primary or secondary source? Are
original sources provided and are they clearly documented? Is there a bibliography?
Relevance: How helpful is the information? Is it written in a useable form, and is it suf-

ficiently detailed?
Oneness: Does the source 'fit' with the other information gathered, enabling alignment
and summarising of facts?
Accuracy: Is this information accurate? Is it possible to know?

Disability categories
Disability categories are broad and include quite heterogeneous populations. For
example, the ASD diagnosis includes highly intelligent and competent people and
people who experience profound impairment. The adage used by ASD educators
'if you know one person with autism, you know one person with autism' certainly
applies to other conditions as well, because many disability categories encompass
significant variability in their impact on individuals. Inconsistency in language concerning both disability and the impact of disability supports the argument that disability labels or categories yield little information for teachers about individuals, how
they learn and how to effectively teach them. Hence, in the context of sustainable
learning we suggest that teachers focus on their students' learning, not labels.
Teachers need to be aware that the term 'disability' means different things in
different contexts, so the labels and categories used to identify students with disabilities are quite variable. Similarly, while some syndromes identified in medicine
or psychology necessarily imply a disability, many do not. The profusion of terms
such as 'disability', 'delay', 'disorder' and 'syndrome' makes defining disability in
a school context a challenging endeavour. For example, in Australia, the Disability Discrimination Act 1992 defines disability quite broadly, but in some Australian
states a student can have a disability according to the Disability Discrimination Act
yet not meet criteria that would enable their local school to access extra funding for
them. Further, understandings of disabilities and their classifications change over
time, and disability categories overlap, as evidenced by complex disabilities or dual
diagnoses.
Many of the labels for disabilities that teachers encounter are those defined in
the DSM-5 (APA 2013a) and the World Health Organization's (2010) International
statistical classification of diseases. The diagnostic labels listed in these works
are constructed in response to recognised behaviour patterns and physiological

~=·-_____

S_u_s-ta-in_a_b_le_L_e_a_r_n-in-g---~-----~------~---~
symptoms and are written for the purpose of guiding diagnosis by medical practitioners. The descriptions and labels alter over time, as different patterns and
hypotheses are developed and framed by new knowledge or ways of seeing differences in human functioning. There is an assumption that there is an underlying
physiological basis for recognised behaviour patterns; however, this has not been
established in many cases. The list below describes the evolution of the DSM criteria in relation to ASD from 1952 to 2013 and shows how this diagnostic label
has changed over time.
DSM-I (1952): Children who exhibited autistic-like symptoms were diagnosed under

the label 'schizophrenic reaction, childhood type'.
DSM-II (1968): Children who exhibited autistic-like symptoms were diagnosed

under the label 'schizophrenic, childhood type'.
DSM-Ill (1980): Young children who exhibited autistic-like symptoms were diag-

nosed under the label 'infantile autism'.
DSM-Ill-R (1987): Children who exhibited autistic-like symptoms were diagnosed

under the labels 'autistic disorder' or 'pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS)'.
DSM-IV (1994): Children who exhibited autistic-like symptoms were diagnosed

under the label 'Pervasive developmental disorder', which had several subtypes:
autistic disorder, Asperger's disorder, Rett's disorder, childhood disintegrative disorder and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS).
DSM-5 (2013): Children who exhibit autistic-like symptoms are diagnosed with the

umbrella diagnosis of 'autism spectrum disorder' (APA 2013b, 1).
Despite the limitations of diagnostic criteria, it is important to acknowledge that some
specific information about disabilities is informative for teachers, because they can
benefit from knowing about general behaviour or development patterns associated
with the conditions. In turn, this information may help teachers identify evidencebased strategies and approaches suitable for their students. Accordingly, summary
information is given below about selected disabilities, described in generic categories
commonly recognised in educational settings. Importantly, this information is linked
to suggested areas of consideration for instructional support. The descriptions here
are brief, because information about disabilities (and learning difficulties) is readily
available elsewhere - for example, in developmental psychology texts, special educational books and online. Each description is followed by lists of key ATRiUM capabilities, differentiation approaches and on-the-spot adjustments on which focus should
initially be placed when planning and delivering responsive teaching.

Autism spectrum disorder
ASD is a lifelong neurodevelopmental disorder that manifests with varying degrees
of severity. It can influence how a person processes information, communicates and

j
I

I
i

_ relates to other people, thereby impacting on their understanding of the social world
and what is happening around them. It is more prevalent in males than in females
but occurs with equal frequency within all ethnic and socioeconomic groups.
People living with ASD commonly have impairments in three development areas:
social communication, social interaction, and imagination and thought (Wing and
Gould 1979). Some people experience substantial difficulties in all areas, while for
others the impact may be subtle and more evident in some development areas than
in others. Related factors include sensory sensitivity, restricted and repetitive interests, anxiety, executive functioning constraints and learning difficulties. Many people
with ASD have intellectual capacities in the average range (some with particular
strengths or specific weaknesses in cognitive domains), some have advanced intellectual capacities, and some have profound intellectual disability.
In the school setting, students experiencing ASD often benefit from structured
classroom routines, with advanced warning of impending changes and a wellorganised learning environment, including clearly articulated, regularly referred to
and consistently enforced rewards and rules. The use of social stories, social scripts
and visual representation, such as comic-style drawings, is an often-cited strategy for
supporting understanding about social skills, desirable and undesirable behaviours
and developing insights into others' emotions.

ATRiUM capabilities
• active learning (curriculum access)
• relationships (empathy, emotional insight)
• managing self (self-regulation)

Differentiation approaches
• varying the participation mode - for example, using an JCT application rather than
a written task to show understanding
• planning further to support students in group work contexts - for example, giving
students specific roles within a group
• providing scaffolds for tasks - for example, breaking down tasks into step-by-step
components
• using visual schedules and reminders to support learning, organisation and behaviour
• adjusting the level of task difficulty to suit students' academic and social capabilities

On-the-spot adjustments
• using preferential seating or a seating plan for the whole class
• giving opportunities for lesson breaks
• using 'fiddle toys' or other small items to help regulate sensory issues or anxiety
• allowing students the option to move away from or otherwise manage a potential
source of anxiety or sensory overload - for example, wearing headphones to block
out noise

!,~'. .-_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __
···ii
Sustainable Learning
~·!.

Intellectual disability
People with an intellectual disability experience limitations in some aspects of
daily functioning and in their ability to learn and use new information. Terms
commonly used synonymously for intellectual disability include 'cognitive disabi].
ity', 'developmental delay' and 'learning disability' (Hinckson and Curtis 2013).
The terminology is ambiguous and caution is required, as not all students who
are described as having a developmental delay or a learning disability actually
have an intellectual disability. It can be a stand-alone condition, a symptom of
a syndrome (for example, Down syndrome) or the impact of a condition such as
cerebral palsy (although not all people with cerebral palsy have an intellectual
disability).
Jutellectual disability results from a wide range of possible impairments or
conditious, and its impact varies with individuals and their context. Some people
with mild intellectual disability are able to complete regular educational courses,
including senior school courses, when supported by appropriate differentiation and
adjustments. Although a person with intellectual disability may become competent
in academic skills such as reading, writing and arithmetic, they are likely to experience difficulty with learning new information, especially higher-order concepts or
complex ideas, and with generalising information between contexts to solve novel
problems. Others, especially those with a moderate or severe intellectual disability,
require a pattern of study quite different from the regular curriculum, with a greater
focus on functional skills.
In the school setting, students with an intellectual disability often benefit from
some extra small-group or individual instruction to develop academic skills, either
in the classroom or in a withdrawal setting. Additional support in developing ageappropriate social skills and in learning about child protection and anti-bullying
strategies can be beneficial.

ATRiUM capabilities
• active learning (curriculum access, communication)

• thinking (knowledge and understanding, memory)
• using language, symbols and JCT (academic skills)

Differentiation approaches
• modifying the task difficulty level
• providing scaffolds or proformas for tasks
• pre-teaching and reteaching
• allowing for additional practice
• breaking down tasks into achievable steps
• facilitating alternative response formats - for example, a poster presentation rather
than an essay

On-the-spot adjustments
• reducing the quantity of work
• providing additional simplified demonstrations or explanations
• using visual representations for ideas and routines

Language disorders
Students experiencing difficulties with understanding language and formulating and
expressing ideas may be assessed by a speech therapist as having a language disorder
in expressive or receptive language, or both. An expressive language disorder means
that the person has difficulty formulating and sequencing ideas, while a receptive
language disorder indicates difficulty processing and understanding others' language. Difficulties with articulation may also present as part of a language disorder,
although many people with expressive or receptive language difficulties speak with
no apparent impediment in their speech, and, conversely, many people who experience articulation difficulties do not have a receptive or expressive language disorder.
Pragmatic language - the use of language in social communication - may also be
impaired in some individuals and is commonly found in those with ASD. Many people with an intellectual disability can also be considered to have a language disorder because of the difficulties they experience in understanding communication and
expressing their ideas.
In the school setting, the presence of a language disorder impacts on individuals' abilities to access and participate in classroom learning and social interactions,
as well as on aspects of daily living. Students with a language disorder often experience a barrier to learning with high levels of verbal interactions in a classroom,
because they cannot adequately process or respond to ideas being discussed. Many
also experience difficulty comprehending texts and following instructions. Students
with a language disorder may have the intellectual capacity to access and participate
in the curriculum but experience learning difficulties because of the impact of their
condition. Students with a language disorder often benefit from extra instruction and
practice opportunities to develop literacy and numeracy skills and concepts, as well
as from some support for appropriate social interactions with peers.

ATRiUM capabilities
• active learning (curriculum access, communication)
• thinking (memory, problem-solving)
• using language, symbols and !CT (academic skills, communication)

Differentiation approaches
• modifying the task difficulty level
• adjusting the way information is presented - for example, by providing alternative
texts with simplified language
• providing step-by-step instructions for tasks
151
'

Sustainable Learning
On-the-spot adjustments
• rephrasing explanations and instructions in simpler language
• limiting the amount of teacher talk when presenting new information
• providing a glossary of key terms
• allowing more time to process information and complete tasks

Vision loss and hearing loss

I,
1.

Significant restrictions in the ability to hear or see can be due to a wide range of factors, including congenital or developmental conditions, health conditions or accident
or trauma. Such restrictions can have a major impact on how students learn and
participate at school.
In the school setting, teachers of students with vision loss or hearing loss need to
engage in significant collaboration with specialists, family members and the students
themselves in order to understand and provide for the students' learning needs. The
input of specialist teachers is often required to help students access curricula and
class teachers and school communities provide appropriate adjustments and modifications. Such requirements may mean that the curriculum needs to be presented
in alternative formats or with significant modification of materials and activities.
Technology can play a significant role in enabling learning and participation, and
options for use of adaptive, assistive and specialised technology applications should
be fully explored. The learning needs of students with vision loss or hearing loss are
unique to the individual and the context, so no specific suggestions for differentiation
or adjustments are given below.

ATRIUM capabilities
• active learning (curriculum access, participation)
• using language, symbols and JCT (!CT proficiency)

Physical disability
Physical disability has many different causes and manifestations and impacts on
each individual quite differently, even with people affected by the same condition.
It can affect a person's gross and fine motor movements, coordination and stamina.
People with a physical disability most often do not also have an intellectual disability, vision loss or hearing loss, and teachers need to ensure they do not make such
assumptions by, for example, talking loudly and slowly to a person in a motorised
scooter.

In the school setting, the effects of physical disability can impact across the
curriculum and in many other school contexts. Students can experience difficulty
with physical access to the school and classrooms, participation in sport and physical education and reaching or carrying equipment. More subtle impacts can be

found in everyday school activities, such as handwriting, tying shoelaces, changing
· clothes, using the toilet, unpacking lunch, judging personal space in lines, closing
zippers in bags, sitting on chairs or on the floor, folding notes to take home and
putting books back on shelves. Some students with a physical disability require
assistance with eating, drinking or personal care. Often, there are implications for
socialisation as well.
Students with a physical disability may require the support of additional personnel, such as a teacher assistant, and additional planning and modifications to
allow access for mobility devices. Whole-school planning may also be required for
the location of classrooms a student with physical disability needs to access, as
well as for the time and distance required to transition between locations in the
school. Planning for excursions requires particular consideration, as students with
a physical disability need to be able to access excursions on the same basis as other
students. Consequently, if a planned excursion involves sites or activities not accessible to students with a physical disability when adequate supports are provided,
alternative options for the excursion for the whole cohort of students should be
considered.

ATRiUM capabilities
The main capability for the teacher's focus is active learning, particularly with
regard to access to and participation in learning, which need broader consideration than physical access and must allow students to fully participate in learning
activities and demonstrate knowledge and skills in assessment tasks. Equitable access
and participation can be enhanced, at least in part, by appropriate use of assistive
technologies.

Differentiation approaches
• presenting information in a form that is accessible to students
• planning learning activities and assessment in which students can fully participate,
which may include effective use of additional personnel
• additional planning to ensure that learning activities in sport, physical education
and hands-on technology subjects provide opportunity for students with physical
disabilities to practise the same skills as their peers, at a level appropriate to the
students' ages and capacities to perform the skills

On-the-spot adjustments
• facilitating the use of a reader or writer
• reducing the quantity of work required
• providing additional time to complete tasks
• accepting different formats for responses

Sustainable Learning

Mental health disorders

'

I!

Mental health disorders encompass a wide range of conditions that can have significant impacts on the learning, participation and wellbeing of students. Such conditions include anxiety, behavioural, mood and psychotic disorders. The most common
mental health disorders are anxiety and depressive illnesses, which hinder active
learning through passive or active non-participation and at their extreme result in
non-attendance and eventually school refusal. Mental health disorders interfere with
thinking skills; they have been described as like 'white noise' in between the learner
and everything that is going on in the classroom. They can affect perception, attention, planning and processing, as well as demonstration of thinking and learning.
Quite often, the experience of living with a mental health disorder impacts on socialisation and self-confidence.
In the school setting, students experiencing a mental health disorder often benefit from access to school psychologists who can work with them, their teachers, their
family members and other mental health professionals to ensure that they feel safe
and ready to learn at school. School personnel such as trusted teachers, teacher aides
or peer mentors can provide additional everyday support for students when needed.
Students experiencing mental health disorders may be particularly vulnerable to
bullying, and this requires close monitoring by staff and supportive peers.

ATRiUM capabilities
• active learning (curriculum participation)
• managing self (self-regulation, motivation)

Differentiation approaches
• varying the task demands and participation expectations to suit students' current
capacity
• avoiding or modifying at times written tasks, performance tasks and activities that
require sustained attention or extensive planning

On-the-spot adjustments
• varying the timetable
• planning preferential seating
• allowing for frequent lesson breaks
• reducing the amount of content in learning and assessment tasks

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
ADHD can significantly impact a student's learning and participation. As mentioned
in an earlier chapter, contrary to the implication of the disorder's name, students
experiencing ADHD often appear to have too much attention - they can pay attention to everything and consequently have difficulty filtering out irrelevant stimuli and

\
l

I

'

constraining impulses. The disorder commonly affects organisational and planning
skills, such that students with the condition frequently struggle with organising themselves, their possessions and their thinking, which can lead to difficulties in learning
and socialisation.
In the school setting, students with ADHD benefit from teachers having knowledge about the condition and proactively responding to their learning needs - this can
sometimes be a challenge, as students with ADHD can be more impulsive, disruptive
or disengaged than other students. Additionally, some children who have diagnoses
of ADHD are in receipt of medical intervention. Schools may have to play a role in the
management of this intervention and, through communication with parents or carers
and health professionals, to contribute to informed decision-making around the use
and evaluation of the effectiveness of medication.

ATRIUM capabilities
• active learning (curriculum access)
• thinking (memory)
• managing self (self-regulation, attention, behaviour)

Differentiation approaches
• limiting the duration of learning tasks and activities
• reducing expectations of the quantity of work to be completed
• providing a variety of tasks using different modes of responding
• incorporating students' strengths or interests in learning activities

On-the-spot adjustments
• breaking down tasks into achievable steps
• supplying an external representation of time passing - for example, an eggtimer or
digital timer with a visual representation, not just a clock
• providing organisational supports
• demonstrating planning strategies and scaffolds and encouraging students to use
them
• setting appropriate work targets or goals
• implementing an individual reinforcement or reward schedule
This brief review of disabilities and learning difficulties presents different conditions
as discrete entities when in fact students may experience coexisting disabilities and
learning difficulties or complex conditions that present new and unique challenges
for teachers.

Sustainable Learning

Complex learning difficulties
and disabilities
Students may experience coexisting disabilities, learning difficulties or complex conditions"!
that present teachers with novel and unique challenges. In recent research, Carpenter and hi,/{,
colleagues identified 'complex learning difficulties and disabilities' as a 'new frontier' in edu•i:'
cation (see Carpenter et al. 2014; Blackburn, Carpenter and Egerton 2012; Carpenter 2010). ";:
Students who can be described as having complex learning difficulties and disabilities

•t

include those with coexisting conditions such as ADHD, complex medical disorders or profound and multiple disabilities as well as those with disability caused by parental substance
abuse (for example, foetal alcohol spectrum disorder), those with difficulties arising from
premature birth and those who, due to advanced medical interventions, have survived illness and trauma. Increasing numbers of children and young people are affected by such

conditions.
Complex learning difficulties and disabilities can result in students displaying complex learning
patterns, very challenging behaviour and extensive learning and social needs that are unfa-

miliar to many educators and at times not easily accommodated in mainstream educational
settings. In fact, Carpenter (2010) posits that educators are currently 'pedagogically bereft'
and that affected students are educationally vulnerable because of the novel, unfamiliar and
unique challenges they present.
There is a need for new, dynamic, personalised approaches to learning for children who have
complex disabilities and learning difficulties. In the United Kingdom, the Complex Learning
Difficulties and Disabilities Research Project has developed resources to support teachers in
developing learning experiences that reflect the strengths and interests of affected students
(see SSAT, n.d.).

Learning difficulties in basic academic skills
Experiencing delays or difficulty in learning basic academic skills is perhaps one of
the most common impacts, or side effects, of having a disability or learning difficulty.
There are also students who do not have a diagnosis but similarly experience difficulties or delays in learning and applying basic academic skills. In fact, students who
do not have a disability or other condition and yet experience difficulties in learning
basic academic skills comprise the largest group of students with special needs, and
the size of this group continues to grow (Ka vale and Forness 2000; Westwood 2003).
In Australia, at least 20 per cent of all school students are considered to have problems in academic areas, most commonly in reading (Westwood and Graham 2000).
This difficulty in learning and applying basic academic skills is referred to generically
in education and psychology literature as 'learning disability' or, more commonly in
Australia and New Zealand, 'learning difficulty'. For the purposes of the discussion to

rr
i

fo]low in this section of the text, to be consistent with the literature the term 'learning
difficulties' is used to refer to students with or without a disability or learning difficulty who experience difficulties or delays in learning and applying basic academic
skills (Westwood and Graham 2000).
Effective recall and application of basic academic skills are key prerequisites for
school learning across the curriculum in primary and secondary schools. Students
who have problems with the basics of literacy and numeracy face myriad difficulties
in accessing the curriculum, especially after the first few years of school, when the
educational focus shifts from learning basic academic skills to using them as tools for
further inquiry and learning. Limitations in basic skills impede progress and development in many aspects oflearning. They can also have devastating effects on students'
self-efficacy and consequent motivation and application; to experience failure or to
underachieve in almost every lesson, every day, due to poor literacy and numeracy
skills is a daunting prospect indeed.
Students experiencing learning difficulties are part of almost every school community, and understanding of their needs and constraints and knowledge of supportive strategies are highly relevant for all classroom teachers. If certain students cannot
read, write or calculate well - that is, they have difficulties in basic academic skills this does not necessarily mean it is not possible for them to learn new concepts or
participate in higher-order learning. Rather, the teachers of such students need to see
learning difficulties as a barrier that for many students can be overcome or worked
around so that they can access the curriculum.
There are some common learner characteristics and barriers to learning
exhibited by many students experiencing learning difficulties. Generally, students
with learning difficulties are inefficient in the ways they go about the
Learner
process of learning (Westwood 1993). demonstrating cognitive behavcharacteristics
are
iours such as using inappropriate or inefficient strategies that produce
the traits possessed
higb error rates (Bellert 2008) and undermine confidence; having diffiby learners !hat could
culty with storing, accessing and coordinating knowledge encountered
affect their ability
previously and with the flexible use of that knowledge; and displayto learn, such as an
ability to stay on task
ing behaviour and thinking patterns detrimental to learning, including
or apply appropriate
effective and well-practised avoidance strategies (Chan and Dally 2001;
strategies.
Westwood 1993). Constraints in working-memory function form a key
underlying characteristic of many students experiencing learning difficulties (Swanson and Sachse-Lee 2001; Swanson and Siegel 2001), and this has
far-reaching implications, making the processes of learning, retaining and using
new information difficult.
While factors within learners and learners' environments can feasibly be
attributed as causes of learning difficulties, it is important for teachers to acknowledge that inefficient or insufficient teaching, poor curricula and poor teacherstudent relationships also contribute to and exacerbate such difficulties (Westwood
2004).

Learning difficulties and component skills;,,
Students experiencing learning difficulties can have problerns with sorne or all of th<)
cornponent skills of reading, writing and rnathernatics, including those listed below.

·

Reading
• phonological awareness (knowledge of sounds in words)
•

phonics (knowledge of letter sounds and blends)

• recognition of previously encountered words
•

decoding of unfarniliar words

•

reading fluency

•

vocabulary knowledge

• comprehension
• application of effective strategies

Writing
•

physical forrnation of letters and legible writing achieved with appropriate speed

• organisation and sequencing of ideas
•

expression of ideas in conventional forrnats (sentences, paragraphs, extended responses)

• vocabulary knowledge
•

spelling

• stamina and persistence with writing
• application of effective strategies

Mathematics
•

nurnber sense (understanding nurnbers and how they are affected by rnathernatical
operations)

• counting sequences and numerical identification
•

language and literacy skills

•

use of nurnber knowledge to solve problerns

• application of effective strategies

Teaching for learning for all
As we have seen, teacher proficiency and other teacher-controlled factors can and
do have influence on students' attainment levels at school and beyond; educational
effectiveness for all students is crucially dependent on the provision of quality teaching by competent teachers (Hattie 2003, 2005; Hill and Crevola 2003). Accordingly,

regardless of student and environmental factors, classroom instructional processes
form a major variable influencing student achievement (Hattie 2005; Mastropieri and
Scruggs 2002; Sanders and Rivers 1996; Schacter and Thum 2004). This is particularly the case for students with disabilities or learning difficulties. Therefore, teachers
must have knowledge and understanding about effective, evidence-based instructional practices if they are to meet their professional obligations to provide learning for all. This section presents information about broad strategies and approaches
shown by research and evaluation to be effective in improving learning outcomes for
all students (Vaughn, Gersten and Chard 2000).

Direct instruction and strategy instruction
One key approach, direct instruction, involves explicit, systematic, step-by-step
instruction led by teachers (see chapter 3). It has a focus on content and requires
explaining and demonstrating with examples, teacher-directed discourse, discussion
and learning from texts and media. Direct instruction is especially applicable when
teaching new or difficult information and when content is critical to subsequent
learning (Mercer, Jordan and Miller 1996). Another important approach, strategy
instruction, involves providing students with information about ways to learn,
procedures for approaching learning, self-regulation and 'doing' learning tasks
(see chapter 7). In a series of influential meta-analyses, Swanson and colleagues
established that direct instruction and strategy instruction have the greatest potential
to improve learning outcomes for students with 'learning disabilities' (interpreted
here to apply to students experiencing learning difficulties) and that when combined
these approaches are particularly powerful and effective (for example, see Swanson
1999; Swanson, Carson and Sachs-Lee 1996; Swanson and Hoskyn 1998). Direct
instruction and strategy instruction are generally effective for students with disabilities
or learning difficulties, regardless of the content area (Swanson 1999).

Task difficulty, grouping and questioning
In further analysis, Swanson and colleagues discerned three instructional components
common across various instructional models and content areas as the most effective
approaches for improving students' academic skills, problem-solving, behaviour and
social skills (Swanson 1999; Swanson, Hoskyn and Lee 1999). The first of these is
control of task difficulty by scaffolding learning - for example, using activities with
the level of difficulty adjusted (easier, harder or more specific to the needs of the
learner), the teacher providing extra assistance or simplifying demonstrations, and
sequencing the procedure in steps from easy to difficult tasks. The second is teaching
students in small interactive groups of five or less, and the third is directed response
questioning - using interactive questions and answers as well as teaching students to
generate questions as they work. The latter is also related to 'think aloud' procedures
(Vaughn, Gersten and Chard 2000), during which teachers or peers verbalise
questioning, thinking and problem-solving as they read or problem solve.
159
I

I '•------------::------------ ------------._!

Sustainable Learning

~--------~

---=----~---~------~-

Deliberate practice
Deliberate practice, another strategy for improving student achievement, uses wellstructured activities that allow for repeated experiences of critical aspects of a task
(Ericsson 1990; Pegg 2013). Deliberate practice is different from rote content repetition.
Rote repetition simply requires repeating a task, and while it may resuit in the ability to
perform the task in the short term and within the same context, it is different from and
less effective than deliberate practice, which supports students to develop automaticity and to transfer knowledge across settings. Within deliberate practice, specific activities focus on identified errors or weaknesses, and its implementation involves attention,
rehearsal, repetition and feedback, resuiting in new knowledge or skills that can later be
further developed (Brabeck and Jeffrey 2010). Access to adequate practice opportunities
is particuiarly important for some students with disabilities or learning difficuities, as
they may need to rehearse strategies and information more frequently than other learners. Importantly, deliberate practice can improve student motivation to learn information
and procedures, because the focused practice improves performance (Pegg 2013).

Feedback
The benefits of deliberate practice are enhanced when students are provided with
timely and descriptive feedback. Feedback can be summative - for example, a percentage rank or grade on a test - or formative, when it is ongoing and communicated
to the learner in order to improve learning (Shute 2009). Educators have understood
the potential for feedback to positively influence performance for some time (for
example, Fuchs and Fuchs 1986; Lysakowski and Walberg 1982). and its importance as a key instructional strategy has gained prominence since the publication of
Hattie's work supporting the idea that it is the most powerful influence in enhancing
student achievement (for example, Hattie 2003, 2005, 2009).
Feedback is considered in detail in chapter 5, but in summary, teachers improve
student outcomes by initiating effective feedback practices that provide information about how and why students understand or misunderstand a specific task or
content area and what steps they must take to improve (Hattie 2003). Feedback is
most effective when it directly relates to the task and provides students with different, additional or enhanced information. It is also powerful when it relates to selfregulation and task completion. Least effective feedback is that which is about the self
and is unrelated to performance of a task (Hattie and Timperley 2007).

Reciprocal teaching
Reciprocal teaching is an instructional approach that features a dialogue, most commonly in the form of questions and answers, between the teacher and a small group
of students (Palincsar and Brown 1984). However, in this approach it is not necessarily the teacher who asks the questions; rather, students are scaffolded to ask and
answer questions of each other. It is a well-known instructional routine that has
been shown, through research, to improve text comprehension (see Rosenshine and

Meister 1994). Although reciprocal teaching was designed as a reading strategy, it is
included in this section describing generic strategies because it has broad application to learning, not only in reading but in other content areas. such as social studies
and mathematics problem-solving, and is applicable to students with different ability
levels across all grades (Lederer 2000; van Garderen 2004).
In reciprocal teaching, the adult and students take turns assuming the role of
'teacher' (Palincsar 1986). They interact by predicting. questioning, summarising
and clarifying information from a text.
When students engage in predicting what will happen or what information the
author wants them to understand from what they are about to read, they are activating their background knowledge. They also learn to use the text's structure to help
them make defensible predictions. The questioning part of the strategy provides students with opportunities to identify the kind of information that forms the basis of a
good question. to frame their own questions and then to engage in asking themselves
and their peers what their answers might be. Summarising is often a challenging task
for students with disabilities or learning difficulties. Many find it hard to condense
information and to determine which parts of a text are important and which can be
omitted without losing key concepts. Teaching summarising requires modelling and
practice before students experience independent success. Clarifying, the final aspect
of the reciprocal teaching strategy. encourages students to identify difficult vocabulary and parts of the text where the meaning is unclear and gives them practice at
implementing 'fix up' strategies to address comprehension breakdowns. Once students are taught in a structured and direct way to clarify their understanding of text
through re-reading, reading ahead, using pictures or structural clues and asking for
help, the conditions are set for them to read meaningfully and to engage thoughtfully
with both narrative and factual texts (Graham and Beller\ 2004, 2007).

Classroom management
While the idea that providing students with relevant, respectful curricula and educational tasks that will enable them to succeed reduces the need for conversations
about classroom management certainly has merit, the reality of complex contemporary
classrooms requires teachers to also develop, implement and refine a set of skills and
approaches for managing classroom interactions and organisation. The aim of implementing such skills is to reduce the likelihood of disruptive behaviour occurring or
reoccurring. In order to establish and maintain a positive learning environment,
teachers need to prevent and minimise the impact of disruptive student behaviour.
Richmond (2007) has developed a set of generic classroom management skills relevant
to a wide range of approaches that can support teachers in promoting a classroom environment that facilitates learning. The key premises of the approach are that teacher
language in the classroom should be predominately about learning, not management,
and that teachers can practise a range of skills that minimise teacher management talk.
Richmond's 'essential skills for classroom management' are given below and are listed

Sustainable Learning
from least intrusive to most intrusive, carrying the implication that teachers should
predominately rely on least intrusive skills and implement the more intrusive skills
only when earlier approaches have not been effective in changing student behaviour.

I'

Establishing expectations: Clearly articulate rules for prosocial behaviour and check
student understanding of these rules in the current context.
Giving instructions: Concisely and effectively describe or show what students are
expected to do.
Waiting and scanning: After giving instructions, stand still, stop talking and start
looking! Allow students time to process the information and scan the group for indications of non-understanding or reluctance.

I

'.,

Cueing with parallel acknowledgment: Acknowledge the on-task behaviour of a student or group with the intention of prompting others to behave in the same manner.
Encouraging with body language: Use the power of body language to encourage students to stay on task or get on task by making eye contact, touching student work,
walking near students or making discreet nodding movements or finger signals.
Encouraging with description: Describe a desired learning behaviour seen or heard,
either to an individual or the whole group. In the absence of desired learning behaviours, describe them anyway (rather than describing undesirable behaviours).
Attending selectively and ignoring tactically: To avoid unintentionally reinforcing
off-task behaviour that is not seriously disturbing others, keep visually scanning to
monitor the student who is of concern. (Do not ignore very inappropriate behaviour.)
Giving a choice: Respectfully challenge the student's persistent off-task behaviour by
describing available choices and their logical consequences.
Following through: Firmly deliver a pre-planned action-that is, do what was planned
and explained when the student was given a choice. Act calmly and with confidence.
Debriefing: After a behavioural incident, provide an opportunity for those involved
and witnesses to say what happened. Avoid dramatising or sanitising the event;
rather, simply talk it through and reflect upon what happened. (Richmond 2007)

Think and do 6 .4: Classroom management
MicroskiUs are
discrete capabilities

Research further Richmond's (2007) 'essential skills for classroom
management' (sometimes referred to as microskills). For each skill, do
the following:

that teachers earl use

Consider why it is useful in promoting a learning-focused classroom
environment.

to promote student
behaviours that
support learning.

2

Give an example of what a teacl1er would say or do when
implementing the skill.

3 Think of an example of when you have used the skill or when you
have observed another teacher using the skill.

Learning for all focuses on student capabilities rather than on disability or learning difficulty labels. This strengths-based perspective acknowledges differences in
student capabilities and proposes that such differences provide vital information for
teachers as they plan and implement responsive teaching for effective learning. Purposeful, open communication and information-sharing with students and their family
members support a holistic approach to understanding the learning needs of students. Educational research over the past half-century has identified evidence-based
strategies and approaches that responsive teachers can utilise in their endeavours to
authentically provide learning for all.

Further reading
Attwood, T. 2008. The complete guide to Asperger's syndrome. London and Philadelphia, PA:
Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. 2008. 'Disability in Australia: intellectual disability.'
Bulletin no. 67. Australian Government. November. www.aihw.gov.au/WorkArea/Download
Asset.aspx?id=6442452891.

Autism New Zealand Inc. website: www.autismnz.org.nz/.
Education Queensland. n.d. 'Better behaviour better learning: essential skills for classroom
management; core learning component.' Queensland Government. http://edgd801.csc4
learning.com/801 images/corelearningessentialskil\s.pdf.

!.

Frith, U. 1991. Autism and Asperger syndrome. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
New Zealand Education. 2014. 'Supporting children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD).'
New Zealand Education. 26 June. www.minedu.govt.nz/NZEducation/EducationPolicies/
SpecialEducation/OurWorkPrograrnme/SupportingChildrenWithASD.aspx.
Physical as Anything.com website: www.physicalasanything.com.au/.
SSAT. n.d. 'Complex learning difficulties and disabilities research project.' SSAT. http://complex
ld.ssa trust. org. Uk/project-resources. html.
Sue Larkey -Australia website: www.suelarkey.com.au/.
Sue Larkey's New Zealand website: www.suelarkey.co.nz/.

References
APA (American Psychiatric Association). 2013a. Diagnostic statistical manual of mental disorders. 5th edn. Arlington, VA: APA.
- - . 2013b. 11-ustism spectrum disorder.' Fact sheet. APA. www.dsm5.org/Documents/
Autism% 20Spectru m % 20Disorder% 20Fact% 20Sheet. pdf.

Sustainable Learning
Beller!, A. 2008. 'Narrowing the gap: a report on the OuickSmart mathematics intervention.'
Australian Journal of Learning Difficulties 14 (2): 171-83.
Blackbum, C., B. Carpenter and J. Egerton. 2012. Educating children and young people with
fetal alcohol spectrum disorder. Oxford: Routledge.

I

Bourke, R. and J. Loveridge. 2013. 'The role of systematic reviews in exploring possibilities for
evidence-based practice.' New Zealand Journal of Teachers' Work 10 (1 ): 1-3.
I

.
I .
. I

I.

I

Brabeck, M. and J. Jeffrey. 2010. 'Practice for knowledge acquisition (not drill and kill).' American
Psychological Association. www.apa.org/education/k12/practice-acquisition.aspx#.

;

·1

Carpenter, B. 2010. 'Disadvantaged, deprived and disabled.' Special Children, no. 193: 42-5.
Carpenter, B., J. Egerton, T. Brooks, B. Cockbill, J. Fotheringham and H. Rawson. 2014. Children
and young people with complex learning difficulties and disabilities: a resource book for
teachers and teaching assistants. Oxford: Taylor & Francis.
Chan, L. and K. Dally. 2001. 'Learning disabilities and literacy and numeracy development.'
Australian Journal of Learning Disabilities 6 (1 ): 12-19.
Department of Education and Communities. n.d. Physical as Anything.com. Website. NSW
Government. www.physicalasanything.com.au/.
Ericsson, K. A. 1990. 'The scientific study of expert levels of performance: general implications
tor optimal learning and creativity: High Ability Studies 9 (1 ): 75-100.
Fuchs, D. and L. Fuchs. 2006. 'Introduction to response to intervention: what, why, and how
valid is it?' Reading Research Quarterly41 (1): 93-9.
Fuchs, L. S. and D. Fuchs. 1986. 'Effects of systematic formative evaluation on student
ach·,evement: a meta-analysis: Exceptional Children 53 (3): 199-208.
Gersten, R., D. Compton, C. M. Connor, J. Dimino, L. Santoro, S. Linan-Thompson and
W D. Tilly. 2009. Assisting students struggling with reading: response to intervention and
multi-tier intervention for reading in the primary grades; a practice guide.' National Center
tor Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences and
US Department of Education. http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/pdl/practice_guides/rti_reading_
pg_021809.pdl.
Glover, T. A. and J.C. Di Perna. 2007. 'Service delivery for response to intervention: core components and directions for future research.' School Psychology Review 36 (4): 526-640.
Graham, L. and J. Bailey. 2007. 'Learning disabilities and dilliculties: an Australian conspectus:
introduction to the special issue.' Journal of Learning Difficulties 40 (5): 386-91.
Graham, L. and A. Bellert, 2004. 'Reading comprehension for students with learning disabilities.'
In B. Y. L. Wong, ed., Learning about learning disabilities, 251-79. San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.

- - . 2007. 'Effective reading comprehension instruction for students with learning disabilities.'
Australian Journal of Dyslexia and Specific Learning Disabilities 2 (spring-summer 20072008): 7-15.

-----·----·

--·---

Hattie, J. A. 2003. 'Teachers make a difference: what is the research evidence?' Paper presented
at the ACER Research Conference. Melbourne. 19-21 October. Text available at SA
Department for Education and Child Development. www.decd.sa.gov.au/limestonecoast/
files/pages/new%20page/plc/teachers_make_a_difference.pdf.
- - . 2005. 'What is the nature of evidence that makes a difference to learning?' Australian
Council for Educational Research. http://research.acer.edu.au/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=
1008&context~research_conference_2005.
- - . 2009. Visible learning: A synthesis of over 800 meta-analyses relating to achievement.
Oxford: Routledge.
Hattie, J. and H. Timperley. 2007 'The power of feedback'. Review of Educational Research 77
(1): 81-112.
Hill, P. W. and C. A. M. Crevola. 2003. 'The literacy challenge in Australian primary schools.'
In V. Zbar and T. Mackay, eds. Leading the education debate. Melbourne: Incorporated
Association of Registered Teachers of Victoria.
Hinckson, E. A. and A. Curtis. 2013. 'Measuring physical activity in children and youth living
with intellectual disabilities: a systematic review.' Research in Developmental Disabilities
34 11 ): 72-86.
Kavale, K. and S. Forness. 2000. 'What definitions of learning disabilities say and don't say: a
critical analysis.' Journal of Learning Disabilities 33 (3): 239-56.
Koltko-Rivera, M. E. 2006. 'Rediscovering the later version of Maslow's hierarchy of needs:
self-transcendence and opportunities for theory, research, and unification.' Review of
General Psychology 10 141: 302- n
Lederer, J.M. 2000. 'Reciprocal teaching of social studies in inclusive elementary classrooms.'
Journal of Learning Disabilities 33 (1 ): 91-106.
Lines, C., G. Miller and A. Arthur-Stanley. 2011. The power of family-school partnering (FSP): a
practical guide for school mental health professionals and educators. New York: Routledge.
Lysakowski, R. S. and H. J. Walberg. 1982. 'Instructional effects of cues, participation, and
corrective feedback: a quantitative synthesis.' Educational Research Journal 19 (4): 559-78.
Maslow, A. 1954. Motivation and personality. New York: Harper and Row.
- - . 1987. Motivation and personality, 3rd edn. New York: Harper and Row.
Mastropieri, M.A. andT. E. Scruggs. 2002. Effective instruction for special education. Austin,
TX: Pro-Ed.
Mercer, C. D., L.A. Jordan and S. P. Miller. 1996. 'Constructivistic math instruction for diverse
learners.' Learning Disabilities Research & Practice 11 (3): 290-306.
Ministry of Health. 2014. Website. New Zealand Government. 9 July. www.health.govt.nz/.
Palincsar, A. S. 1986. 'Metacognitive strategy instruction.' Exceptional Children 5312): 118-24.
Palincsar, A. S. and A. L. Brown. 1984. 'Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and
comprehension-monitoring activities.' Cognition & Instruction 1 {2): 117.

i:

.,1

l

I

Sustainable Learning
Pegg, J. 2013. 'Building the realities of working memory and neural functioning into planning\
instruction and teaching: Australian Council for Educational Research. http://research.acer :
edu .au/cgi/viewcontent .cgi? article~ 1179&context~research_conference.
·
:, i
I

i

Richmond, C. 2007 Teach more, manage less: a minimalist approach to behaviour
management. Sydney: Scholastic Australia Pty Limited.
Rosenshine, B. and C. Meister. 1994. 'Reciprocal teaching: a review of the research.' Review
of Educational Research 64 (4): 479-530.
Sanders, W. L. and J. C. Rivers 1996. Cumulative and residual effects of teachers on future
students' academic achievement. Knoxville, TN: University of Tennessee Value-Added
Research and Assessment Center.

,.
1,

Schacter, J. and Y. M. Thum. 2004. 'Paying for high- and low-quality teaching.' Economics of
Education Review 23 (4): 411-30.

1

Shute, V. J. 2009. 'Simply assessment.' lnternationa/JournalofLearningandMedia 1 (2): 1-11.

1
1

SSAT n.d. 'Complex learning difficulties and disabilities research project.' SSAT http://
complexld. ssatrust. org .uk.
Swanson, H. L. 1999. 'Reading research for students with LO: a meta-analysis of intervention
outcomes.' Journal of Learning Disabilities 32 (6): 503-34.
Swanson, H. L. and C. Sachse-Lee. 2001. 'A subgroup analysis of working memory in children
with reading disabilities: domain-general or domain-specific deficiency?' Journal of Learning
Disabilities 34 (3): 249-63.
Swanson, H. L. and L. Siegel. 2001. 'Learning disabilities as a working rnemory deficit.' issues
in Education 7 (1): 1-48.
Swanson, H. L. and M. Hoskyn. 1998. 'Experimental intervention research on students with
learning disabilities: a meta-analysis of treatment outcomes.' Review of Educational
Research 68 (3): 277-321.
Swanson, H. L., C. Carson and C. Sachs-Lee. 1996. 'A selective synthesis of intervention
research for students with learning disabilities: School Psychology Review 25 (3): 370-91.
Swanson, H. L., M. Hoskyn and C. Lee. 1999. Interventions for students with learning
disabilities: a meta-analysis of treatment outcomes. New York: Guilford Press.
van Garderen, D. 2004. 'Reciprocal teaching as a comprehension strategy for understanding
mathematical word problems.' Reading & Writing Quarterly 20 (2): 225-9.
Vaughn, S. 2003. '3-tier reading model: reducing reading difficulties for kindergarten through
third grade students.' Paper presented at the Celebrating Inclusive Catholic Schools
Conference. Broadbeach. July.
Vaughn, S., R. Gersten and D. J. Chard. 2000. 'The underlying message in LD intervention
research: findings from research syntheses.' Exceptional Children 67 (1): 99-114.
Westwood, P. 1993. 'Striving for positive outcomes for students with learning difficulties.'
Special Education Perspectives 2 (21: 87-94.

1

· - · 2003. Commonsense methods for children with special educational needs. London:
Routledge Falmer.
- · 2004. Learning and learning difficulties: a handbook for teachers. Melbourne: Australian
Council for Educational Research.
Westwood, P. and L. Graham. 2000. 'How many children with special needs in regular classes:
official predictions vs teachers' perceptions in South Australia and New South Wales.'
Australian Journal of Learning Disabilities 5 (3): 24-35.
Wing, L. and J. Gould. 1979. 'Severe impairments of social interaction and associated
abnormalities in children: epidemiology and classification.' Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders 9 (11: 11-29.
World Health Organization. 2010. International statistical classification of diseases and
related health problems, 10th revision. World Health Organization. http://apps.who.int/
classifications/icd 10/browse/2010/en.

167
I

